---
title: And that was 2020
category: web
---

The first thing to say about 2020 is that I didn’t publish much. If you take a look at [the Writing page](/posts/), you’ll see just one entry before this. Compare that with the first ten years of this website, when I’d publish at a rate of about one post a week.

The second thing to say is that what I did write was a bit _odd_ and self-contradictory. When I posted <cite>[Static works](/posts/static/)</cite> we were about to move the website _from_ a traditionally static set-up of Netlify and Jekyll builds to Digital Ocean and a CMS (albeit a flat-file CMS).

I _did_ publish more than one post, though, having moved all the non-work stuff from the last 12 years to [a separate website](https://www.thisdaysportion.com). But even here, the schedule was at best erratic, the content insular, fixating on Kraftwerk, Germany and generally anything not British and/or esoterics. As to why this would be the case, I’m not sure, although I have some ideas, which I’ll save for _the other site_.

I did finally put some effort into writing [in-depth case studies](/work), which got me thinking about what it is I actually do for a job. I’m in a very strange situation, being a semi-decent developer/designer _and_ a project/staff manager. I felt spread very thinly in the first part of 2020, what with developing the Suffolk Libraries website on my own, managing a team of five and having my workload ramped up from March onwards. Moving to a CMS in June clarified things professionally. First and foremost, I’m a staff and project manager. That’s probably why I publish less now; it’s relatively easy writing about the web itself as there’s a constant stream of controversial things happening (CSS in js, everything becoming React, non-accessibility, the indieweb versus Twitter and Facebook, how to write HTML and CSS etc. etc.), whereas posting about project management just feels like being on LinkedIn.

Anyway, here’s a summary of my year on the web.

## New things I learned

Number one: I have little interest in learning new things. That sounds terrible, doesn’t it? Perhaps I should qualify that statement a bit. What I mean is: I use a familiar tech stack that works for me. I can build a functional, editable website with complex data types in a matter of hours using a tried and tested set of ingredients. Most likely the only cost will be the domain name. Those ingredients are:

- Jekyll (with automated site builds)
- Netlify (including Netlify CMS)
- Github
- Tachyons

Now, I _have_ made two major changes to how I do things within this stack.

### Custom properties

We’ve had SASS variables for years, but custom properties really are the business. Declare the property and a class that refers to it and you have your site typography editable in one part of a stylesheet.

### A layout system

I finally settled on this system for putting things next to each other on a screen:

- Use flexbox
- Use `%` width blocks you want to place next to each other. The percentages should add up to 100.
- Apply horizontal padding to each block for gaps between them
- Apply negative horizontal margins to the blocks’ container to cancel out outermost padding
- Use media queries to control the number of blocks that sit by side at various screen widths

I’ve been using flexbox for years; the only thing that’s new is the negative margins. This system is robust and works all the way down to IE10.

## No-Twitter and the Indieweb

I more or less stopped tweeting on July 10. After this date there’s a smattering of automatically generated tweets from my two websites, plus three or four “handcrafted” efforts.

I’d been thinking of doing this for some time for a variety of reasons, but I finally pulled the trigger when I realised it wasn’t particularly healthy being cooped up day after day while checking my Twitter stream literally every two or three minutes. I’m not a fucking lab rat. It was feeding an unhealthy insularity, not to mention the low-level, permanent headache I’d had since April.

Not being on Twitter has made very little difference to my life. I do miss the oddly domestic contact with people I’ve known online (and only online) for over a decade – your Nilses, Florenses and Chrises – as well as reading funny and/or insightful things from people who are a lot smarter than me. But it is no loss getting out of the check-your-phone-every-two-minutes cycle, nor is extricating yourself from the huge cultural war machine that is megabucks social media a bad thing. Reality is horrifying enough.

Of course, we still have the publishing itch, even if it’s not in the form of 800 word missives. I’ve been dabbling in micro.blog this year












